June 22nd, testing one, two, three.
This is June 22nd, and I have the pleasure and honor
of chatting with Gary Halter, professor of
political science. Today we're going to be
recording his memories of his student years.
Later we'll do his faculty years. Gary, for
someone who might not know you in the future as they
listen to this tape or read the transcription,
begin by describing where you grew up, where you
went to high school, what your family did.
Describe your life before coming to A&M. I was born
in Amarillo. My grandparents moved out there and
my mother's family in 1912, I think, and bought
land when the XIT Ranch broke up. And we lived there
until I was six years old, and we moved to Oklahoma
City for about five years, and then eventually to
Wichita Falls. My dad worked for General Mills,
and these were jobs that he was moved to. And he was a
flour miller for General Mills. And really from, I
guess, the sixth grade on, I was around, I only went
to the first grade in Amarillo and then we moved to
Oklahoma City. Moved to Wichita Falls when I was in
the sixth grade. I graduated from high school
there and then attended Midwestern University
for a year in Wichita Falls before coming to Texas
A&M. You went to Wichita Falls High School? Yes,
Wichita Falls Senior High. When you got out of high
school, what did you think was your goal in terms of
major and your profession later? I wanted to be a
veterinarian. And you went to Midwestern and
lived at home? Yes. And I worked for a veterinarian
there. How did you come to A&M? How did you know
about it? What led you to consider coming here? I
was the only vet school in Texas and still is. And I
did get a scholarship from Rotary Club in Wichita
Falls, which really made it, I guess, possible for
me to come to A&M. And how much was the scholarship?
It was about $500. Tuition was $50 a semester and
then I had a job and work. I didn't have a lot of money
but I wasn't hard up either. Books were, you know,
nothing like that. You got here in the fall of what?
Fall of, I guess it would have been 1960. Had you
visited before you came down to enroll? No. You had
never been to College Station before. How did you
get here that first time? I came with a friend who
had been here the year before, who came his
freshman year. Well, it would have been both
freshman years and rode down with him. What did you
bring? Oh, that they had sent us, the material and
stuff that we had to have, the uniform, the number,
you know, sort of a list of things that you're
expected to have with you when you arrive to
survive in the Corps, I guess. Also, it was in a big
trunk.
Was it one of the official footlockers? Yeah,
everybody had to have it. Where did you get that
footlocker? I don't remember. I bought it
somewhere. You bought it. And
describe arriving and getting out and finding
your dorm and that sort of thing. Well, I still
remember the first time you turned the corner
there at Texas Avenue, Highway 6, and what's now
University Drive. I'm not sure what it was then.
You looked over and saw Texas A&M. You had this
water tower and smokestack. I thought it was a
state prison at first. It really was a
bleak-looking place. I think somewhat
disappointing. I think it was something like,
that's it, type deal. Now the friend you rode with,
was he a sophomore? Yeah. He had been here the
previous year. Yes, right. Had he attempted to
acquaint you with A&M? To some degree, yeah. I
think you kind of knew something about what to
expect, you know. Did you have any difficulty in
the paperwork of transferring hours and getting
admitted and all that? No, that was, I don't think
it's near as complicated as it is today. Okay, now
describe moving into the dorm and getting into an
outfit as a sophomore. Well, I came here expecting
to be a freshman, and then I went over to the
military science departments. I'd already been
in a year of ROTC at Midwestern, because they also
required all, just like A&M did at that time,
compulsory two-year ROTC program. And they did it
at Midwestern because they got paid. So all the
guys got to do that. And they also got down on PE. I
think they had to do so. And I went over to them and
they said, well, you've already had the first two
years. You can't be a freshman in the Corps. You're
going to be a sophomore in the Corps. And so they
send you back and say, go tell your company
commander who goes into orbit when he hears this.
God damn, this can't happen. You can't be a damn
sophomore. Anyway, it was a big confrontation, I
presume, between he and the military people,
because he came back and said, well, damn it, I
don't like it. Anyway, I think had I known, I
probably would have said, that's okay, I'll stay a
freshman. I don't know what the military people
would have said, but it was kind of a case of you
weren't accepted by sophomores because you
hadn't been through the trial by fire and the
freshmen resented it. But I wasn't smart enough to
realize that that was gonna be a problem. Were you
called a frog? Yeah, oh yeah. Describe your room
and your roommate and that sort of thing. Well,
everything was steel or concrete, I think, in the
dorms at that time. You had steel bunk beds and
steel desks. They did have these big old wooden
chairs. I know Paul Van Riper bought a bunch of
them. He still has them out on his porch in his house
in Bryan. And steel chest of drawers, concrete
floor, no curtains, I guess, anything like that.
They were pretty bleak. And how was your roommate
assigned? They just said, this is your roommate. A
guy by the name of,
his nickname was Cocky Anderton. He was from Bel
Air in Houston. Anderton? Yeah, Anderton. And
this was by sheer accident? Yeah. You didn't know
each other? No, no. All right, now I know about Fish
Old Lady nickname. Was there a nickname for a
sophomore roommate? No. Well, I didn't have one,
but anyway. And what outfit? Company G3. What was
the nickname? I don't know that it had one. Which
dorm? 16, I believe it was. In the, quote, new dorm
area, new core area. It was a Northgate dorm area.
Oh, Northgate. Oh. Northgate dorms. It's sort of
obscured now because they built those
dormitories with the open-air balconies on them.
It's sort of behind that. It was the furthest
dormitory to University Drive. Does it have a name
now? I'm sure it does, and I have even seen it, but I
don't recall what it is. No elevator, you know. We
were on the fourth floor, as I remember. And the
first floor was occupied by company E2, which had
the dog, the sacred pooch, Reveille, you know. And
there was all of these seniors in the E2 would stand
at the bottom of the stairs and every time he would
leave for, you know, breakfast, lunch, or dinner
and harass you about something. There was one guy
that He was Hispanic, and his name was Rodriguez.
And he expected us to roll the R when we said
Rodriguez. And we would say, hello, Mr.
Rodriguez, and stuff like that. And of course, he
would just go into orbit. There wasn't much you
could do though. You could act embarrassed and
stuff like that. And he would threaten me what he
was going to do. Anyway, and it was really, I'm
trying to think of the guy's name, another guy that
did it a lot.
He and some of his friends later owned, in the sense
they had a loan on what's now Central Park and
College Station. And when I was mayor, you know,
they called and they wanted to talk about whether
the city would be interested in buying this land.
And they had a note with the Arnold family, and it
was about interest and loan payment at the end.
They'd only been paying interest. They used it as a
party place on weekends. They could play football
games and raise hell. And so anyway, these guys
called one to meet with me about it. I thought the
name sounded familiar, but of course I didn't
until I arrived at my office at City Hall. I hear the
guy used to harass me at the front of the stairs.
Anyway, despite that, the city still bought the
land from us. But it turned out, I think, to be a good
deal for everybody, for the Arnolds and the city
and everything. How did you, as a transfer, become
oriented to all kinds of Aggie traditions and so
forth? Well, very quickly I think was part of it,
but not quick enough according to some. Were you
given a guidebook or anything printed? Well, you
had a campusology book, and I think you had to buy
those at Lupo's or something. And you had to be able
to answer all of these questions, you know, like
where are the pennies in the sidewalk and what's on
the back of Lawrence Sullivan Ross' statue and,
you know. All right. Did a sophomore get quizzed by
juniors? Well, I did because, you know, I was kind
of harassed as a freshman even though the, you
know, once again it was the ROTC people that said
this guy's a sophomore. It wasn't the Corps that
was doing it. And I was sort of surprised that the
current Corps commander that says I'm an advisor
to the Corps and I can't really interfere. I can
suggest things. This is the Marine General. I
can't suggest, I don't like to suggest things. It
certainly wasn't that way when I was there.
Colonel Joe Davis, I think he was the commandant,
lived where Vice President Malin Southern lives
today in that house. And, you know, they did a lot
of, including surprise inspections in dorms and
looking for booze. And, you know, they even knew
where we hid most of it. You take the medicine
cabinet out and hang it on a string behind the wall.
Were
you identified in anything on your uniform as a
transfer student? Was there any? Well, you know,
you have different belt buckles that you wear. A
transfer had a different belt buckle? Right, you
had to wear a freshman belt buckle, not a sophomore
belt buckle. It's a smaller Army issue. Well, all
the other brass is the same. The battalion shields
and the cross rifles and the AMC brass, I think, was
on the collar. I think I still have that somewhere.
Were there any, were you assigned some clean up
duties and all that other stuff? I don't think any
more than anybody else. I mean your Saturdays were
taken up with drill and other, most Saturdays
were, or you know, court reps to football games or
something. All right, academically, how did you
get your fall courses? Did you register after you
got here? Yes. Describe registration. Well, I
think it was in Sabisa Dining Hall. And you walked
around and picked up slips of paper. I mean, this is
pre-computer card days, I think. And if there was a
card available in the class at the time, you got the
class. Yeah, I don't remember the exact problem,
but then you went through a number of stages of
harassment and you finally got out of the place
with a schedule. That first semester as you went to
class, describe, make any comparison you can
think of between the class routines here and what
you had known at Midwestern. Well, you know, just
going to class could be an experience, an
harassment of various and sundry sorts. You know,
and you had compulsory friendliness. You had to
say howdy to everybody. And if you knew somebody,
you had to say howdy, whatever their name was, you
know. And if you forgot, then you were in trouble,
you know. And anyway, it was, you know, it really
wasn't a very pleasant experience. You had to whip
out and introduce yourself to everybody. And I
guess they've stopped all that, I think. I
remember when I came back as a faculty member, I
still had freshmen come in and say, howdy, Mr.
Holmes, my name is Ray So-and-so, you know. I
always wanted to do the Lloyd Taylor routine. I
heard that he would say, my name's Shit. I don't
know whether that's really
true or not. In class, though, from the faculty's
point of view, was there any difference between
A&M classes and Midwestern classes in the way the
faculty dealt with the students? No, I don't think
so. They were, you know, they were small classes,
just like they were at Midwestern, maybe 20, 25
people at the most, you know. And what did you get?
Except for chemistry. Chem 101 was still the way it
is. Who taught that? I don't remember the guy's
name. I know for one, I think the second chemistry
course I had was Rakoff, who was still around as a
faculty member when I came back as a faculty
member. Did he have a nickname? If he did, I don't
remember. I don't remember. Did you have any
impressive faculty that first year? Some people
that you still remember, plus or minus? Well, I
don't recall exactly who I had. Years kind of,
because I was only here two years and they kind of
ran together. There was a guy over in sociology
that I know you knew, Harold Brown. I guess I had
never thought about some of the things that he, and
he made light of a lot of activity on the Corps,
trying to get them to think about, in some cases,
the exact stuff that the Bonfire Commission found
of tunnel vision and my optic thinking and things
of that type. I don't know. I was really, I guess I
just never encountered that before. See, he lived
across the street from us. Yes. And he'd gone to, in
Kentucky, oh, boy, the four-year, the small
liberal arts college for poor kids. Oh, Berea,
Berea? Berea, Berea College, yes, he and his wife
both. And the last I knew, he was at the University
of Delaware. Yeah. Was there for many years. I had a
friend in graduate school at the University of
Maryland who had gone to Delaware, you know, and we
started talking about faculty members and
somehow we both had this guy. He had one place to
meet another. Yeah, I think he was. Of course, you
had a great deal of influence on me, but that was my
second year, which would be my junior year in
college. Right. That first year, describe your
day's routine on a class day. What time did you get
up, what did you do, when, and so forth. Take
through the whole day. Well, some guy blew a
whistle out in the hall, you know, some freshman
that was resigned. By what time? About 6.30, I
think it was. And he would say, you know, Company
G-3, fall out for chow in 30 minutes, or whatever it
was, you know. And he would recite the menu. The
menu is, you know, whatever it was for breakfast.
You had to get up and get dressed, and there was
never any time in the morning to shower. That was
something you had to do the night before. You could
have gotten yourself up earlier, but I don't think
anybody ever did that at that age. This was back
when sleep was no longer punishment. So you'd get
up and dress in whatever uniform it was. If it was
raining, you'd have your Class C uniform on. Class
A was formal dress, I guess, as I remember. You put
all that stuff on and go fall out. And maybe the rain
with a poncho on and a helmet and stand out in the
rain until everybody got assembled. And they
checked to make sure everybody was there. I don't
know what they would have done if you weren't
there. But anyway, they would do that. And then
you'd march over to Sabisa. dining hall and go in
and you set, you know, sort of assigned tables. And
generally there was a senior at the table and maybe
some sophomores and freshmen. And the freshmen,
of course, were there to do everything but cut up
the seniors' meat, so to speak, in the sense of make
sure that everything that he wanted. They
literally didn't do that, but you know what I mean.
That's what it struck me as. And, you know, you went
through that and then you would leave and you
didn't march back to the dorms, you went back to the
dorms with your classes. And you had to come back at
noon, you know, and make formation again at noon
and march over to Savisa and have lunch. And then,
you know, once you got through, you left. went to
afternoon classes, and then you might have some
free time in the afternoon to do things. Of course,
there wasn't much to do. What about intramurals?
Well, there was that, intramural sports in the
afternoon, or go to the library and try to hide.
There was an old building called Bagley Hall. And
it was about where the Biological Science
Building East is now. And there were places in
there where you could go and study and nobody would
bother you. So we used to sneak over to Bagley Hall
and hide among the plants. There was one room where
and all these plants in there. Nobody seemed to
mind you being in there. They had lights on when
they were growing these plants. You'd go in there
and study. If you went back to your dorm room, you'd
get a rest. You didn't want to do that.
You had to keep your uniform on all day long and
change different uniforms depending on what it
was. There was also, of course, several days a week
we had to do Yale practice. because it was really
hard to learn complicated yells like farmer's
fight. Farmers, farmers, you're all right. You
know, I mean, it was terrible. It took me years to
learn.
Anyway, so we went. There were two or three nights a
week you'd go to y'all practice. Occasionally
you'd have silver taps, you know, which everybody
came to, I think. Describe your impression of your
first silver taps. Well, it's pretty awesome, you
know, for a young guy, you know. I mean, there'd be
like maybe four buglers up in the, on the second or
third floor, I don't know, I never was in there, but
up in the dome of the academic building and they
would, the doors in the base are opened and they
would play taps and it kind of resonated out of the,
out of the dorm, the dome of the, thing and
everything of course is, is there no lights, pitch
dark, you know, and it's, it's, you know, and
everybody's quiet. It's pretty solemn. Did, did
you all take it seriously? Oh, yeah. No pranks or
jokes? No, not at that, or hazing or anything. You
just quietly walked over and stood around the
quadrangle in front of the academic nagel in
Bolton Hall, and nobody said anything. I think
there was, after taps or before, there were rifle
shots. The Ross Volunteers in front of Sully would
stand there and fire, I guess, a 21-gun salute, and
then everybody went back to the dorms. All right,
normally on a non-Silver Taps evening, you fell
out for chow at what time? It was early, miners'
hours, like 5.30 or so, you know, and maybe 6. And
then, you know, some evenings, too, there were
drills, not like, not as condescending as they did
every Thursday night, you know, but there would be
evening drills sometimes. practicing marching
around Kyle Field, another complicated
procedure that, anyway, you'd do those kinds of
things, and the band would play, and then he might
have you all practice. And then there was always
what we called a quarters, of course, for freshmen
and sophomores. You had to be in your dorm room, at
your desk, both feet on the floor, you know, et
cetera, and studying from a certain time to a
certain time.
During that first semester, did you get the
impression that this was a serious place about
academics? No. It wasn't? No. In terms of rigor,
compare here with what you had experienced at
Midwestern. I don't know that it was any more
difficult, to tell you the truth. I don't recall
that it was. Did they give you all that old lecture
about early on, look to your left, look to your
right, because only one of you is going to be here to
graduate, that sort of thing? I'm sure they did.
But I remember very early on, this was, I think,
when I was still a freshman, which lasted about a
week. The guy says, why did you come to A&M? And I
said, well, I came to get an education. And he
screamed, he said, that's not the reason you came
to A&M. Why did you come to A&M? I'm sorry, I thought
I came here to get an education. You came here to be a
fightin' Texas Aggie. And they would go through
all that routine. And I think that was part of the
problem I had, you see, is that I never quite
accepted that the reason I was here was to become a
fightin' Texas Aggie. I thought I came here to get
an education.
But there were great opportunities for not study,
one thing the Corps provided you with. come up with
excuses to polish brass and shine shoes and look a
lot sharper than everybody else. Your first
football games, what was your impression there?
Oh, that's very exciting. The whole drama, of
course, you've got the home game, you're going to
have midnight yell practice beforehand. I came to
call them later the Nuremberg rallies, the
torchlight parades to Kyle Field and all of that.
And then of course the marching in around the track
at football games. Of course, Kyle Field was a
fraction of what it is now. It had that one little
upper deck where the press box was. In fact, that
thing is still there under the existing thing. Now
you and your buddies all went to the games. Oh,
yeah, yeah. There wasn't a question of it. Did you
have any football dates in the fall, that first
fall? Not here at A&M. I think when we went to TWU or
went to, I guess, what game must have been? The
court trip? Court trip to Dallas or something. We
had the date with some, you know, the arranged
dates with women at TWU that was still kind of
lingering. How were those arranged? Well you just
had a mixer thing, you know, and if you found
someone you wanted to ask to go to the game with you,
you'd ask them. Now I've heard stories about moose
pots, beast buckets, a pot, everybody puts some
money in and the guy that gets stuck with the
dullest date gets the money. Did you ever hear any
of that? No, we didn't do that. I can see that that
would even still be done today probably. Do you
remember the first year, was it Fort Worth or
Dallas? No, I don't. I think that it was Fort Worth.
And how were Aggies treated by the local people on a
court trip? Oh, they were treated very well. Do you
remember how you got up there? Well, in somebody's
car. Well, I didn't have a car my first year, so I
don't know who that was. Did you ever do any Aggie
hitchhiking? No, I didn't. Because I think that
was pretty well gone by the 60s. I once, in fact we
became pretty good friends, and I'm trying to
remember his name, but I was leaving to go to
Houston because I had met this girl that was going
to the University of St. Thomas. And I think they
came up for the Newman Club, which is the Catholic
student organization over at St. Mary's Church.
And I went down to go out with her in Houston. And I
was going out. There was an Aggie out on the road
hitchhiking. And I picked him up and took him down
to Houston. And he said, well, you know, for giving
me a ride, he said, why don't I take you to lunch? And
I said, yeah, great. So we go to the Houston Country
Club. Now, this guy is a relative.
He was the Mr. Houston for years, the guy that was in
the
Roosevelt administration. Jesse Jones? Yeah,
Jesse L. Jones was related to Jesse L. Jones. At
least he claimed he was. I'm trying to remember his
name and I can't. We also, I think, went to Austin
with us one time later on to a game and all. And he was
sort of a secretive guy in some respects, but had
some interesting tales of Texas. While we're on
football, the court trip your freshman year, was
it to Houston or Austin? Do you remember? Yeah, no,
I don't. When you went to Texas games, did those
turn out to be special either year?
No, we just got whipped, as we usually did, yeah. I
had a friend from high school, Travis Reagan, who
was a football player at A&M. At that point, one of
our stars, I think, and I think it was It was my
junior year that we almost beat them in the Texas
game. It was here at Kyle Field, I do remember that.
And Travis caught a pass and came down in the back of
the end zone and of course the referees ruled him
out of bounds because Texas was number one in the
nation and there wasn't any way that A&M was going
to win that game. That's what everybody
concluded. And there were films that showed she
was clearly in bounds and that Texas should have
lost the game. But I'm convinced it was just a
foregone conclusion. And I think Texas came over
here kind of unprepared. A group of people that had
done almost nothing all year long. We had a coach
that used to punt on third down. I forget what that
guy's name was, but I always found that. an odd sort
of strategy that if you screwed it up you'd have
another chance. No you wouldn't. You'd just be
screwed up. Anyway. What did you and your buddies
do those years on Saturday night after a football
game, a home football game? There wasn't much to
do, you know. Come back to the dorm room, maybe try
to find some beer somewhere, get an upperclassman
to buy some stuff for you. Where did Aggies drink
beer then? Well, not in the dorms. That was a real
no-no back then. And, of course, drinking age was
21, as it is now. And, you know, sometimes you'd
drive out on the university farms. In fact, out in
this area where we're sitting, we'd come out here
and drink beer. There used to be a The place south of
here, the Brazos Bowman had an archery range, and
the gate was not very secure, so you could go in
there and go back in the woods. They had kind of an
area there with a covered thing, and it was for bow
hunters. And that was another place you could go
to. As far as you know, when beer was consumed by
those students, perhaps below the age of 21, did a
lot of people get drunk? Oh, I don't think we ever
had enough to really get drunk. I mean, it might be
you had maybe two beers for each person about the
extent of it. Was it always pretty well all male? Oh
yeah, yeah. Well there, you know, there weren't
any women around here except maybe a few in Bryan
and Colley Station and their parents probably
didn't let them date Aggies. Did you ever go to the
Claypits? I don't know. I guess not. I don't know
where that is. Clay pits were down the Welborn Road
and then down in somebody's pasture. And it had
been an old digging. Oh, quarry. Yeah. And it was
just that stagnant water. You'd go out there and
drink, and they'd skinny dip, apparently. And I
think that was earlier. Or at Whiskey Bridge. Did
anybody you know ever go to Whiskey Bridge? Oh,
yeah. In fact, when you turn 21. You went out there
on your birthday, and Alma would give you your
choice of, I don't think anything in the house, but
you got a choice of something. Now you say who did?
Alma. E-L? No, A-L-M-A, Alma. Oh, a female. The
woman that ran Whiskey Bridge. Oh.